['It is in Ireland’s interests to stop blocking a tax on financial transactions', 'Opinion: The financial services lobby is by far the most important and powerful in Ireland', 'The Financial Services Centre in Dublin. “Ireland opposes the FTT because the IFSC lobby opposes it.”  Photograph: Bryan O’Brien', 'In some real and surreal ways, we do not live in a country. We live in a story. Ireland has always been, not just a place but a narrative, a tale we spin for others. Most recently, we have been telling the story we think Germany wants to hear. It is a success story, a tale of plucky little Ireland, taking the punishment it deserves, suffering in silence and then emerging, lessons learned, into a brighter day. The problem is that we told this tale far too convincingly. We are trapped in a convenient fiction.', 'Our fate is being determined right now in the negotiations for Angela Merkel’s new coalition government. What happens in Berlin in the coming weeks is massively more important to us than our own upcoming budget. Which is why the most chilling words we could read are those of Arthur Beesley and Suzanne Lynch’s report in Friday’s Online News: “In German official circles right now, the clear sense remains that Ireland is not a cause for any concern and that the likely return to private bond markets demonstrates that the State has no need for any more debt relief.”', 'This belief that Ireland does not need debt relief has everything to do with the story we have spun (we’re grand) and nothing to do with the reality: that if you put public and private debt together we are the most indebted people in the world. This reality was spelled out by the International Monetary Fund in its eighth report on Ireland. The IMF pointed out that the Government’s magic trick on the promissory notes, hailed as a triumph for domestic political consumption, actually does very little to reduce the State’s debt mountain, creating “only a marginal improvement in the debt outlook”. It described Ireland’s unemployment and underemployment rate (which it put at 23 per cent) as “staggering”. And it pointed out that without the significant economic growth that is always being promised for “next year”, Ireland’s debt levels will rise to 134 per cent of GDP in 2018 and 150 per cent in 2021. (We’re supposed to be at 60 per cent.)', '. We ask that you report content that you in good faith believe violates the above rules by clicking the Flag link next to the offending comment or by filling out this form .', 'Latest Economy', 'Comments are closed for this article.']