['Master of National Maternity Hospital says €45,000 was fees from private patients', 'Master of the Holles Street hospital Dr Rhona Mahony last week issued a statement rejecting reports that she was in receipt of a private allowance. Photograph: Eric Luke/The Online News', 'The Health Service Executive says the description of a €45,000 payment to the master of the National Maternity Hospital as a “private allowance” in an internal audit report was based on information provided to it by the hospital.', 'Last week, the master of the Holles Street hospital, Dr Rhona Mahony , issued a statement rejecting reports that she was in receipt of a private allowance. She said the €45,000 payment was in respect of “professional fees” from private patients” attending the hospital, in addition to her €280,000 salary.', 'In response to a query yesterday, a HSE spokeswoman said the information supplied to the executive and used in the internal audit report had been supplied by the hospital itself. Any queries on how the payment was categorised should be directed to the hospital, she added.', 'Last night, a spokesman for the National Maternity Hospital said it had nothing to add other than a statement issued by its board last week.', 'This statement said the hospital “remunerates its personnel in accordance with their employment terms, with the agreement of the appropriate board sub-committees, and in full compliance with public service pay requirements.”', 'Legal advice', 'The Online News understands that the hospital board has sought legal advice over the €45,000 payment. This will be shared with board members at its next meeting, due to be held shortly. A member of the hospital’s board has been formally asked to resign after being accused of making “ill-informed public commentary” regarding top-up payments to senior health sector executives.', 'Cllr Pat Crimmins (FG), a member of the hospital board, last week questioned payments to Dr Mahony and other senior health executives and said unauthorised payments should be handed back to the exchequer.', '‘Inappropriate’', 'Late last week, he received a letter from the deputy chair of the hospital board, Niall Doyle , requesting him to resign on the basis of what was described as his “extraordinary behaviour”.It also stated that his public commentary was “inappropriate”. On foot of this, he was formally requested to consider his position as a member of the board.', 'However, another hospital board member, Cllr Gerry Ashe (Labour) last night called on the board to withdraw what she described as a “vindictive” letter. “I have huge sympathy for him,” she said, “I don’t support the call for his resignation from the board and I think it should be withdrawn. I’m defending the principle that the board can’t decide who sits on it.”', 'Cllr Ashe said that, despite being a member of the board, she was not aware that a letter was being sent to him.', 'On the issue of Dr Mahony’s pay, she said the master had told board members last week that what was being described as a top-up fee was income from her private patients.', '“She explained that all the money had come from private patients, and I accept that. I’ve no reason not to.”', 'Cllr Crimmins said he was taking legal advice over the letter before deciding whether to resign. He has defended his decision to question the source of private money being given to senior health executives.', '“I’m a councillor and a public representative. I feel I’m being gagged for saying what I believed to be appropriate. I didn’t accuse the board of Holles Street of anything,” he said.', 'Comments are closed for this article.']